.\" why-denied(1) — CLI for the LD_PRELOAD permission-denied diagnostic shim.
.\"
.TH WHY-DENIED 1 "June 2026" "why-denied" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
why-denied \- control and run the permission-denied diagnostic shim
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B why-denied
.I command
[\fIargs\fR...]
.PP
.B why-denied
[\fB-h\fR|\fB--help\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B why-denied
is a POSIX shell front-end for the \fBwhy-denied.so\fR shared library, which is
loaded via \fBLD_PRELOAD\fR and prints a human-readable root cause when a
monitored syscall fails with \fBEACCES\fR or \fBEPERM\fR.
.PP
The default package install still activates interactive shells through
\fB/etc/profile.d/why-denied.sh\fR. The CLI is additive: use it for ad-hoc
runs, smoke tests, and scoped enable/disable of non-interactive diagnostics.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status
Report the library path, whether \fBLD_PRELOAD\fR includes the shim, TTY state,
service/global scopes, and environment overrides.
.TP
.B run [\fB\-\-\fR] \fIcmd\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
Preload \fBwhy-denied.so\fR, set \fBWHY_DENIED_ENABLE=1\fR (unless
\fBWHY_DENIED_DISABLE\fR is already set), and replace the current process with
\fIcmd\fR.
.TP
.B try \fIpath\fR
Shorthand for \fBrun cat \-\- \fIpath\fR.
.TP
.B shell
Start a preloaded interactive login shell (bash, zsh, or \fB$SHELL\fR).
.TP
.B enable [\fIscope\fR]
Turn diagnostics on. \fIscope\fR is \fBsession\fR (default), \fBservice\fR, or
\fBglobal\fR. Session scope prints shell \fBexport\fR/\fBunset\fR lines for
\fBeval\fR; service and global require root.
.TP
.B disable [\fIscope\fR]
Turn diagnostics off for the given \fIscope\fR.
.TP
.B help
Show a short usage summary (same as \fB\-h\fR and \fB\-\-help\fR).
.SH SCOPES
.TP
.B session
Print environment changes for the current shell:
.RS
.EX
eval "$(why-denied enable session)"
eval "$(why-denied disable session)"
.EE
.RE
.TP
.B service
Write or remove \fB/etc/systemd/system.conf.d/why-denied.conf\fR, which sets
manager-wide \fBDefaultEnvironment\fR for \fBLD_PRELOAD\fR and
\fBWHY_DENIED_ENABLE\fR. Run \fBsystemctl daemon-reload\fR and restart affected
units.
.TP
.B global
Create or remove \fB/etc/why-denied/service-mode\fR. When the library is
preloaded and this marker exists, diagnostics engage even without a TTY.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LD_PRELOAD
Loads \fBwhy-denied.so\fR at process start. Set by the CLI, \fBprofile.d\fR, or
manually.
.TP
.B WHY_DENIED_ENABLE
When set, engage on \fBEACCES\fR/\fBEPERM\fR even when standard error is not a
terminal.
.TP
.B WHY_DENIED_DISABLE
Force silence; wins over \fBWHY_DENIED_ENABLE\fR and the global service-mode
marker.
.TP
.B WHY_DENIED_SO
Override the path to the shared library (default
\fB/usr/lib/why-denied/why-denied.so\fR). Intended for development and tests.
.TP
.B WHY_DENIED_CLI_ROOT
Redirect \fB/etc\fR paths used by service/global scopes (tests only).
.TP
.B WHY_DENIED_REEXEC
Internal guard used by \fBprofile.d\fR and \fBshell\fR to avoid re-exec loops.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /usr/bin/why-denied
This command.
.TP
.B /usr/lib/why-denied/why-denied.so
Preloaded shared library.
.TP
.B /etc/profile.d/why-denied.sh
Interactive-session activation hook.
.TP
.B /etc/why-denied/service-mode
Global non-TTY enable marker (\fBenable global\fR).
.TP
.B /etc/systemd/system.conf.d/why-denied.conf
Systemd manager drop-in (\fBenable service\fR).
.SH EXAMPLES
Try a denial once:
.PP
.EX
why-denied run cat /etc/shadow
why-denied try /etc/shadow
.EE
.PP
Debug a script (including cron and journald):
.PP
.EX
why-denied run \-\- ./deploy.sh
.EE
.PP
Enable diagnostics for systemd services during troubleshooting:
.PP
.EX
sudo why-denied enable service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl restart myunit.service
journalctl \-u myunit.service \-f
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
The project README at \fIhttps://github.com/doper1/why-denied\fR.
.SH AUTHOR
why-denied contributors.
